Major Course Output Machine Learning Application to Real-World Data Due Date: Release Date: January 12, 2026
March 21, 2026 (Saturday), 8:00 AM
1 Project Description
In this project, students will apply the machine learning concepts and techniques they have learned in the course to a real-
world dataset. The goal is to develop a comprehensive understanding of the end-to-end process of formulating a supervised
machine learning task, selecting appropriate machine learning models, training and evaluating these models, and interpreting
the results. Through this project, the students should be able to demonstrate the following learning outcomes:
LO1. Define and differentiate the various machine learning techniques and approaches.
LO2. Assess the impact of the design and parameters of various machine learning models in the context of a machine
learning task.
LO3. Apply machine learning approaches on various tasks on real-world datasets, and effectively communicating
findings and results.
2 Groupings
The project must be accomplished in groups of 4. If the class size is not divisible by 4, the instructor is responsible for
balancing in the number of students in each group, but no group can have more than 4 members. Students may pick their
own group members.
3 Dataset and Project Proposal
For the first phase of this project, students must propose a project that involves the application of supervised machine
learning techniques to a real-world dataset. The following criteria must be observed for the proposal:
1. Although the task is not required to be socially impactful, the students must be able to justify why this task is interesting
to explore on a personal level, i.e., the task must be something that the students care about, not just selected
out of convenience or compliance.
2. The task must relatively unexplored. Avoid selecting tasks that have already been extensively studied, either in
academic works or in blogs, tutorial and other online resources. While it is not required for the task to be completely
novel, students must avoid simply replicating existing works. Toy datasets are not allowed.
3. There must be a concrete and feasible plan to acquire a dataset to train the models for the task. It is
highly recommended to pick tasks where there are already publicly avaiable datasets. If the students plan to collect
their own data, they must show that their plan is feasible within the timeframe of the project.
We suggest looking for datasets in dataset-focused academic journals such as Data in Brief and Scientific Data. You are
not required to use datasets from these journals, however. Online data repositories such as Kaggle, UCI Machine Learning
Repository can serve as alternative sources, but please use caution since many of the datasets there have already been
extensively studied.
Each group must prepare the following information for their proposed project:
1. The supervised machine learning task to be performed, in the format: “Predict Y based on X ”, where Y is the
target variable to be predicted, and X is the target list of features to be used for prediction.
2. The dataset source or plan on how the dataset will be collected
3. Short justification (1–2 sentences) on why the task is interesting to the group members
All groups must seek the approval of the instructor for their proposed task and the corresponding dataset as early as possible.
All groups must have an approved dataset already on or before January 30, 2026 (Friday), 11:59 PM. Please follow your
instructor’s directions on how to submit your proposal for approval.
1
4 Machine Learning Project Implementation
Once the proposal has been approved, the group may proceed to implement the machine learning project. The following is
a general outline of the steps that must be performed:
1. Data Preparation. Collect the dataset and clean the data.
2. Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA). Analyze the dataset to understand its characteristics, distributions, and rela-
tionships between features. Visualizations and statistical summaries must be generated for a better understanding of
the data.
3. Data Preprocessing Perform any necessary preprocessing steps to prepare the data for machine learning. Perform
feature selection if needed.
4. Model Selection and Training. Select appropriate supervised machine learning models for the task. Train the
models using the prepared dataset. Ensure proper training-validation-test splits to avoid data leakage.
5. Error Analysis and Model Tuning. Analyze the errors made by the models and make necessary adjustments to
improve model performance.
6. Model Evaluation. Evaluate the performance of the trained models using appropriate metrics. Compare the perfor-
mance of different models and explain the possible reasons why models performed well or poorly.
Please note that the steps outlined above is just a guide. You may adjust the steps as needed based on how your project
progresses. For example, you may find that additional data preprocessing is needed after performing EDA, or you may need
to revisit model selection after performing error analysis. Please do not treat the steps above as a rigid sequence that must
be followed exactly.
For this project, you are required to implement at least three supervised machine learning models: two classical
machine learning models and one neural network model. The choice for the type of classical models and neural network
model must be justified.
You may use any machine learning libraries or frameworks in your implementation, but you must be prepared to explain how
the models work.
5 Deliverables
The following are the deliverables for this project:
5.1 Jupyter Notebook
The entire implementation of the machine learning project must be documented in a Jupyter Notebook. The Notebook must
include both code cells needed to replicate all the outputs of the project, as well as markdown cells that provide explanations
on the different steps taken in the project.
5.2 Poster
A poster must be prepared summarizing the methodology and results of the project. The poster must concisely include the
following information:
1. The goal of the project
2. Description of the dataset used
3. The best machine learning model implemented and architecture details
4. Key results and findings
5. Any other strong or unique aspects of the project
You are encouraged to use visuals and figures to effectively communicate your results. You should only put your best
model on the poster. If there are multiple models that performed well and there is no clear best model, you may include a
comparison table of the top models.
The poster must be designed to fit on one whole illustration board (30 inches x 40 inches). You can use this Canva template
as a guide. You may use any software or tools to create the poster. Ensure that when printed, the poster is readable, even
though you are only required to submit a digital copy.
2
6 Submission
All deliverables must be via AnimoSpace before March 21, 2026 (Saturday), 8:00 AM. The submission must include two files:
.zip file containing the Jupyter Notebook and all supporting files, and a .pdf file of the poster. If the dataset files are small
enough (less than 100 MB), you may include them in the .zip file. Otherwise, please provide a link to a public repository
where the dataset can be downloaded.
7 Oral Exam
Each group will be required to attend an oral exam, where the instructor will ask questions about the project. The oral
exam is a major part of the grade. Groups who submit complete projects, but are unable to answer questions about their
process will receive major penalties in the grade and, in extreme cases where ownership of the work could not be established,
will be treated as academic dishonesty resulting in a grade of 0.0 for the course. Details for the oral exam will be announced
by the invidividual instructors.
8 Generative AI Use Policy
You are allowed to use AI tools for aid in concept understanding, exploration, and brainstorming. You are not allowed to
use AI tools to directly generate code or text that will be used in your submission. If you do use AI tools, you must adhere
to the following guidelines:
1. You must declare the use of such tools by specifying the tool that was used, and a detailed description of how the
tool was used.
2. You must validate any AI response through your own understanding of the concepts or through your own research.
3. You must be able to articulate the thought processes, rationales, and implementation details of your work, and through
this you must be able to show that human agency was maintained even if AI was used in augmenting the process.
9 Rubrics for Grading
Refer to the AnimoSpace course page for the detailed rubrics for grading.
3